[Music]
hey let's play some what-if shall we our
planet rotates around its axis from west
to east at a speed of over a thousand
miles per hour at the equator and this
pattern has lasted for billions of years
since the earth was formed but what if
one day our planet suddenly started to
rotate backward from east to west so hey
let's put a different spin on it shall
we
it would be one thing if the Earth's
continents and oceans were situated
symmetrically against the equator when
the change of direction happened in this
case the only change people would notice
would be the climate which would turn
into a mirror image of the current one
in other words
there'd be no dramatic changes but since
life on our planet is rarely about
symmetry the effects of the earth
rotating backward would be way more
complicated but keep in mind that
everything will depend on how our planet
would change the direction of its
rotation for example let's imagine that
it happened suddenly like one day the
planet was calmly rotating from west to
east and then in the blink of an eye
it's already moving backward from east
to west remember in the very beginning I
told you about the speed of the Earth's
rotation so in the case of an abrupt
switch of the direction an instant
change in speed would make about 2,000
miles per hour
well hold on to something that means
that everything not fixed to the ground
would be hurled eastward
buildings and other man-made structures
would collapse sending tons of debris
into the air and creating chaos the
sudden change in direction would move
all the water on the planet
which in turn would create vast tsunamis
they'd move across the planet destroying
everything in their path and literally
changing the whole structure of the
earth oh and don't forget about the
hurricane-force winds which would
essentially wipe out everything still
standing after the massive waves in
short the earth would turn into a gloomy
muddy mess well let's not dwell on this
highly unlikely scenario and instead
picture how different our planet would
be if it rotated from east to west right
from the beginning in this case you
would see the moon and sunrise in the
West and said in the east but that would
be the smallest of all the differences
the thing is that the different spinning
direction of the planet would create
unexpected weather conditions on all the
continents and the earth itself would be
a totally different place some regions
of the world would be colder than they
are now
for example Western Europe would be
plagued by severe freezing winters every
year and vice-versa Russia would warm up
and lose the title of one of the coldest
countries in the world some areas of the
world would become much greener than
they are as we know them other regions
on the contrary would turn into deserts
for example North America would be
nothing more than a dry Dust Bowl in
South America the Amazon rainforest
would get replaced by arid sand dunes
but the area from the Middle East to
Central Africa on the other hand would
be covered with lush dense forests and
the rest of the deserts would be either
covered with grass or scattered trees
now do you think such dramatic changes
have already happened sometime in the
history of our planet right about your
opinion in the comment section below
anyway the east to west rotation would
also influence ocean currents few people
know that nowadays the climate on our
planet is greatly influenced by the amo
sea it's the ocean current that
transports Heat
all over the world on the forward
spinning earth this current is in the
Atlantic Ocean but should the planets
start to rotate backward the AMOC would
move to the Pacific it would be a bit
stronger than the original current and
it would bring more heat to Eastern
Russia in general there would be much
more greenery on our planet and
therefore more oxygen for everyone to
breathe on the other hand this might not
turn out to be such a great thing now
the ocean is swarming with phytoplankton
bacteria but on that different earth
instead of plankton cyanobacteria would
dominate these billion-year-old bacteria
were some of the first inhabitants of
our planet but the problem with them is
that they pump out huge amounts of
oxygen now if they replaced all other
kinds of bacteria they would completely
transform the Earth's atmosphere thus it
would contain so much oxygen that people
would simply be unable to breathe and
therefore it would be hard for them to
exist on the planet
this way the chances are high that on a
backward spinning earth people would be
replaced with a completely different
species but even if it did happen we
wouldn't know about that would we in any
case it's almost impossible to imagine
the conditions that could make our
planet begin spinning backward so I
guess this is just one of those
hypothetical questions like what if the
Earth's core cooled down but wait indeed
what would happen then well we'd have
quite a cool core of course now
somewhere incredibly deep beneath the
surface of our planet lies the Earth's
core a ball of scorching hot iron which
is surrounded by boiling liquid metal
the temperature of the Earth's core is
more than twice as high as the
temperature on the surface of the Sun
and so far it seems to work well for all
of us but could the planet function if
its core turned into a frozen rock
one of the things that makes life on the
earth possible is the geomagnetic field
it's like a powerful superhero that
protects us from all the harmful stuff
attacking our planet from space
including highly charged particles from
the Sun and cosmic radiation
what's more thanks to this geomagnetic
shield solar winds can't strip away the
Earth's atmosphere now you may ask what
is the geomagnetic field have to do with
the red-hot core of the planet well the
thing is that this Barry field is
created by the Earth's core you don't
notice it but when the planet spins the
speed of its solid inner core and the
speed of its liquid outer core are
different as a result the speed
difference creates electric currents
which in turn generate the geomagnetic
field now let's imagine that both parts
of the Earth's core cooled down for some
inexplicable reason in this case the
worst would happen our planet would
simply lose its magnetic field oh but if
there's no magnetic field there's also
no atmosphere
that's why sometime later the earth
would start to resemble Mars a little
bit too much for my liking first you
wouldn't be able to breathe without an
oxygen mask and a pressure suit rocks
gas water and everything else wouldn't
be heated by the boiling core anymore
the earth would grow colder and colder
there would be no earthquakes volcanoes
would stop spewing lava and the
continents wouldn't be drifting apart
bit by bit as they do now now
unfortunately people wouldn't be around
to feel happy about the geological
stability the eternal cold and lack of
oxygen would either finish us or prevent
us from living normal lives and then
there would be the massive problem of
protecting the planet from space
radiation remember it's not very clear
what exactly would happen to the planet
if it lost the electromagnetic field but
it wouldn't be anything good the earth
would probably see a radioactive wave
onslaught which would overheat it to a
degree to a degree at which it would
become uninhabitable
or it would suffer from solar wind
attacks which would sweep away the
oceans seas lakes and rivers but
whichever guess is correct the earth
would turn into a lifeless cold rock in
any case who kind of shakes you right
down to the core huh well the only thing
I can say at this point is let's take
care of this earth the only home we have
in the universe and let's keep spinning
let's keep spinning hey if you learn
something new today then give the video
a like and share it with a friend and
here are some other cool videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life